Common: button clarification (#4308)
ArduPilot/ardupilot_wiki: common/source/docs/common-buttons.rst

Buttons
=======

> Up to four external buttons or switches connected to the autopilot can be configured to trigger :ref:`Auxiliary Functions <common-auxiliary-functions>` similar to how RC channel switches can trigger them. These button inputs can be either analog voltage inputs (pull-to-ground or pull-to-high) or PWM inputs.

Author: Txs, I've updated the top paragraph.  I've left the bottom paragraph out for now though because the parameter descriptions don't include pin numbers for anything except the AUX OUT pins.

> Up to four external buttons or switches connected to the autopilot can be configured to trigger :ref:`Auxiliary Functions <common-auxiliary-functions>` similar to how RC channel switches can trigger them. These button inputs can be either analog voltage inputs (pull-to-ground or pull-to-high) or PWM inputs.

Reviewer: those are given as an aid  for IOMCU based autopilots...any appropriate pin can be input....if that is confusing we should change the value and descriptions to make it clear....those numbers for a MATEK flight controller are SERVO1-SERVO6, etc.

.. note::

>     Some :ref:`auxiliary function <common-auxiliary-functions>` have a middle position (e.g "Parachute 3 Pos Switch") but the middle position cannot be triggered from a button

Author: .. is there any value is re-stating that the middle position cannot be triggered "either from analog voltage or PWM input signals"?  It sort of implies that maybe there is some 3rd method that does allow the middle position to be triggered.

Basic Setup
-----------

For autopilots with an IOMCU (e.g. Pixhawk, CubeOrange) the external button or switch should be connected to the autopilot's AUX outputs (not the MAIN outputs).  To ease configuration and avoid timer conflicts it may be best to use AUX outputs at the high end (e.g. AUX5 or AUX6) far from outputs used for motors and servos.  For autopilots without an IOMCU (e.g. pixracer, etc) the main outputs may be used.

- Set :ref:`BTN_ENABLE<BTN_ENABLE>` = 1 (Enable) and refresh parameters

> - If using 4.2 (or later) set :ref:`SERVOx_FUNCTION<SERVO14_FUNCTION>` = -1 (GPIO) where "x" is the servo output channel connected to the button (e.g. SERVO14_FUNCTION is for AUX output 6)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In order to use an normal SERVOx output as a button input for firmware version 4.2 (or later), set :ref:`SERVOx_FUNCTION<SERVO14_FUNCTION>` = -1 (GPIO) where "x" is the servo output channel connected to the button (e.g. SERVO14_FUNCTION is for AUX output 6)
```

Author: Txs this is probably true but again, the param descriptions don't specify any pins except for the AUX OUTs so I'd like to keep it simple for now.

> - If using 4.1 (or earlier) on an autopilot with an IOMCU (e.g. Pixhawk, CubeOrange) set BRD_PWM_COUNT low enough so that the servo output may be used for reading an analog voltage (aka GPIO) or PWM input.  E.g. BRD_PWM_COUNT = 4 means only AUX outputs 5 and 6 can be used, BRD_PWM_COUNT = 0 means AUX outputs 1 to 6 can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In order to use an normal SERVOx output as a button input for firmware version 4.1 (or earlier) on an autopilot with an IOMCU (e.g. Pixhawk, CubeOrange), set BRD_PWM_COUNT low enough so that the servo output may be used for reading an analog voltage (aka GPIO) or PWM input.  E.g. BRD_PWM_COUNT = 4 means only AUX outputs 5 and 6 can be used, BRD_PWM_COUNT = 0 means AUX outputs 1 to 6 can be used.
```

Author: Same here, let's keep it simple and just focus on the aux outs.  Hopefully at some point someone will come through and re-test with other random GPIO pins and update the param descriptions and this wiki page at the same time (maybe I will..).

.. warning::

    Some autopilots pull pins high or low during startup and this may lead to the auxiliary function triggering soon after startup

PWM Input Setup
---------------

A PWM input can be configured as a button input.  The parameter changes listed below are for the 1st button but the 2nd, 3rd and 4th buttons can be setup similarly.

- Set :ref:`BTN_PIN1<BTN_PIN1>` to the number of the pin connected to the button/switch (e.g. "55" = "AUXOUT6")
- Set :ref:`BTN_OPTIONS1<BTN_OPTIONS1>` = to "1" to trigger the auxiliary function with a PWM > 1800us
- Set :ref:`BTN_OPTIONS1<BTN_OPTIONS1>` = to "3" to trigger the auxiliary function with a PWM < 1200us
- Set :ref:`BTN_FUNC1<BTN_FUNC1>` to the :ref:`Auxiliary Function <common-auxiliary-functions>` to be triggered.  If set to 0, no function is triggered

.. note::

    The valid PWM input range is 800us to 2200us.  If the PWM value falls outside this range it is equivalent to the RC auxiliary function switches position going to the low position.  Normally this means the auxiliary function will not be triggered.

Additional Setup
----------------

> :ref:`BTN_REPORT_SEND<BTN_REPORT_SEND>` sets the length of time that a `BUTTON_CHANGE <https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#BUTTON_CHANGE>`__ mavlink2 message is sent to the ground control station each time the button state changes.  At the time of this writing we do not know of any GCS that make use of this message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`BTN_REPORT_SEND<BTN_REPORT_SEND>` sets the length of time that a `BUTTON_CHANGE <https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#BUTTON_CHANGE>`__ mavlink2 message is sent to the ground control station each time the button state changes.  At the time of this writing we do not know of any GCS that makes use of this message.
```

Author: fixed, txs!

Buttons
=======

> Up to four external buttons or switches connected to the autopilot can be configured to trigger :ref:`Auxiliary Functions <common-auxiliary-functions>` similar to how RC channel switches can trigger them. These button inputs can be configured to use either digital logic signal analog voltage inputs (pull-to-ground or pull-to-high) or PWM signal inputs.

Author: Ah you're right here.. it's digital inputs not analog as I've said.  maybe we should remove the word "analog"?  Anyway, I'm happy either way.

Basic Setup
-----------

In order to use a button, an autopilot pin must be configured as a GPIO. Many autopilots have dedicated pins for this, but some do not. In those cases, a normal SERVO/MOTOR output must be configured as a GPIO pin instead of an :ref:`common-rcoutput-mapping`.

For autopilots with an IOMCU (e.g. Pixhawk, CubeOrange) the external button or switch should be connected to the autopilot's AUX outputs (not the MAIN outputs).  To ease configuration and avoid timer conflicts it may be best to use AUX outputs at the high end (e.g. AUX5 or AUX6) far from outputs used for motors and servos.  For autopilots without an IOMCU (e.g. pixracer, etc) the normal SERVO/MOTOR outputs may be used.

- Set :ref:`BTN_ENABLE<BTN_ENABLE>` = 1 (Enable) and refresh parameters

> - If using 4.2 (or later) set the ``SERVOx_FUNCTION`` = -1 (GPIO) where "x" is the servo output channel connected to the button (e.g. SERVO9_FUNCTION is for AUX output 1 for boards using an IOMCU)

Author: we have a little difference of opinion on how to handle these "x" parameters.  I like to link to one of the parameters anyway while you like to put them in quotes.  Not a big deal of course either way but I (of course) like my way better.

Reviewer: the problem I have is the link arrives at a parameter that does not match the highlited text...alternatively we can explicitly show it as a stated example,and make them match...either way is fine with me...

PWM Input Setup
---------------

PWM signals can be used as button inputs.  PWM values >1800us or <1200us can be used to trigger the Auxiliary Function. The parameter changes listed below are for the 1st button, but the 2nd, 3rd and 4th buttons can be setup similarly. As above, to determine which GPIO pin number corresponds to which autopilot SERVO/MOTOR output pin or dedicated GPIO pin, the autopilot's hwdef.dat file must be consulted. See :ref:`common-gpios` for how to determine this.

- Set :ref:`BTN_PIN1<BTN_PIN1>` to the number of the GPIO connected to the button/switch (e.g. "55" = "AUXOUT6")
- Set :ref:`BTN_OPTIONS1<BTN_OPTIONS1>` = to "1" to be interpreted as a "HIGH" position by the auxiliary function with a PWM > 1800us

> - Set :ref:`BTN_OPTIONS1<BTN_OPTIONS1>` = to "3" to be interpreted as a "LOW" position by the auxiliary function with a PWM < 1200us

Author: Ah, I think this change is incorrect.  With BTN_OPTIONS1 = 3 the button's HIGH position is triggered when the PWM < 1200us.

Reviewer: right...
